---
layout: paper
title: Detection and prevalence of boid inclusion body disease in collections of boas and pythons using immunological assays.
image: /images/papers/Chang_2016_inclusions.jpg
authors: Chang L, Fu D, Stenglein MD, Hernandez JA, DeRisi JL, Jacobson ER
year: 2016
ref: Chang et al 2016 Vet J
journal: The Veterinary Journal
pdf: /pdfs/papers/chang_2016.pdf
doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2016.10.006
pmid: 27938703
---

## Abstract

Inclusion body disease (IBD) of boas and pythons is characterized by the
intracytoplasmic accumulation of an antigenic 68 kDa viral protein IBDP, more
recently known as the nucleoprotein (NP) of the reptarenaviruses. Blood samples
of 131 captive boas and pythons (53 boa constrictors, Boa constrictor; 35 rainbow
boas, Epicrates cenchria; 22 ball pythons, Python regius; 5 carpet pythons,
Morelia spilota; 6 Burmese pythons, Python bivittatus; 4 Jamaican boas, Epicrates
subflavus; 5 anacondas, Eunectes spp.; and 1 green tree python, Morelia viridis) 
were obtained from 28 collections in the USA. Diagnosis of IBD was initially made
by the identification of eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies in
hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained blood films and isolated peripheral white
blood cells (PWBC). The overall prevalence of IBD in study snakes was 25/131 or
19% (95% CI = 12.4%, 25.8%) with boa constrictors being more commonly infected
(22/53 or 41.5%; 95% CI = 28.2%, 54.8%) than other species in this study. Of the 
22 IBD positive boa constrictors, 87% were clinically healthy, 13% had various
signs of chronic illness, and none showed signs of central nervous system
disease. Using a validated monoclonal anti-NP antibody, NP was confirmed within
the isolated PWBC by immunohistochemical staining and Western blots. The presence
of reptarenaviruses within blood samples of 27 boa constrictors and three rainbow
boas was also assessed by PCR. Among boa constrictors, very good agreements were 
shown between the observation of inclusion bodies (by HE stain) and the presence 
of NP (by immunohistochemistry, kappa = 0.92; and Western blots, kappa = 0.89),
or the presence of reptarenaviruses (by PCR; kappa = 0.92).


#### Comment

This paper was largely the work of Rita Chang and Elliott Jacobson, who literally wrote [the textbook](https://www.amazon.com/Infectious-Diseases-Pathology-Reptiles-Color/dp/0849323215) on reptile infectious diseases.  We contributed by assessing reptarenavirus prevalence using PCR.
