---
layout: paper
title: Age and prior blood feeding of Anopheles gambiae influences their susceptibility and gene expression patterns to ivermectin-containing blood meals.
image: /images/papers/an_gambiae_crop.png
authors: Seaman JA, Alout H, Meyers JI, Stenglein MD, Dabiré RK, Lozano-Fuentes S, Burton TA, Kuklinski WS, Black WC 4th, Foy BD
year: 2015
ref: Seaman et al. 2015
journal: BMC Genomics
pdf: /pdfs/papers/Seaman_2015_BMC_Genomics.pdf
doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2029-8
pmid: 26471037
---

# Abstract

BACKGROUND: Ivermectin has been proposed as a novel malaria transmission control 
tool based on its insecticidal properties and unique route of acquisition through
human blood. To maximize ivermectin's effect and identify potential
resistance/tolerance mechanisms, it is important to understand its effect on
mosquito physiology and potential to shift mosquito population age-structure. We 
therefore investigated ivermectin susceptibility and gene expression changes in
several age groups of female Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes.

METHODS: The effect of aging on ivermectin susceptibility was analyzed in three
age groups (2, 6, and 14-days) of colonized female Anopheles gambiaemosquitoes
using standard survivorship assays. Gene expression patterns were then analyzed
by transcriptome sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. RT-qPCR was used 
to validate transcriptional changes and also to examine expression in a
different, colonized strain and in wild mosquitoes, both of which blood fed
naturally on an ivermectin-treated person.

RESULTS: Mosquitoes of different ages and blood meal history died at different
frequencies after ingesting ivermectin. Mortality was lowest in 2-day old
mosquitoes exposed on their first blood meal and highest in 6-day old mosquitoes 
exposed on their second blood meal. Twenty-four hours following ivermectin
ingestion, 101 and 187 genes were differentially-expressed relative to control
blood-fed, in 2 and 6-day groups, respectively. Transcription patterns of select 
genes were similar in membrane-fed, colonized, and naturally-fed wild vectors.
Transcripts from several unexpected functional classes were highly up-regulated, 
including Niemann-Pick Type C (NPC) genes, peritrophic matrix-associated genes,
and immune-response genes, and these exhibited different transcription patterns
between age groups, which may explain the observed susceptibility differences.
Niemann-Pick Type 2 genes were the most highly up-regulated transcripts after
ivermectin ingestion (up to 160 fold) and comparing phylogeny to transcriptional 
patterns revealed that NPCs have rapidly evolved and separate members respond to 
either blood meals or to ivermectin.

CONCLUSION: We present evidence of increased ivermectin susceptibility in older
An. gambiae mosquitoes that had previously bloodfed. Differential expression
analysis suggests complex midgut interactions resulting from ivermectin ingestion
that likely involve blood meal digestion physiological responses, midgut
microflora, and innate immune responses. Thus, the transcription of certain gene 
families is consistently affected by ivermectin ingestion, and may provide
important clues to ivermectin's broad effects on malaria vectors. These findings 
contribute to the growing understanding of ivermectin's potential as a
transmission control tool.
